Functional programming might be
a relatively new word to hear in the context of a JavaScript meetup.
But it's foundational concepts have been around since
the 1930s and the development of lambda calculus.
Lambda calculus is the idea that any computation,
any program, can be expressed as a function or set of functions.
In fact, any calculation can be expressed with lambda calculus,
which is a very surface level way of saying that it is equivalent to Turing complete.
A man named Alonzo Church created a formal theory of lambda calculus in 1934.
Maybe the name Lambda sounds familiar?
As with most mathematical symbols,
it's from the Greek alphabet,
but you might also know it from AWS Lambda,
the serverless computing platform,
also based in lambda calculus.
In fact, the name Lambda is popular to hear in the tech world right now,
which got me wondering why did Dr. Church choose this symbol for his new calculus?
It turns out that there was no particular reason.
He chose that symbol simply because it wasn't already associated with something else.
He once received a postcard asking him, "Why lambda?"
His response was simply,
"Eeny meeny, miney moe."
So I thought that was fun.
If we take a closer look,
lambda calculus treats a program like an assembly line.
You start with certain inputs in the beginning,
and by passing these inputs through various machines,
you end up with a new result.
Dr. Church wasn't as interested in the logic inside of every function.
It was really this transition of inputs to outputs that he cared about.
Those outputs can then be passed to new functions,
which in turn will become your end result.
There are a few important takeaways from this.
The first is that values don't update, instead,
you create new values by returning them from functions,
and secondly, functions do nothing other than return a result.
These rules of lambda calculus might seem very strict,
but they still allow us to express any computation.
How did we get from lambda calculus to functional programming?
It took a long time.
Functional programming remained a mainly academic endeavor
from the 40s all the way till 2008 or so.
But more and more, developers are turning to the concepts of
lambda calculus to solve more modern computing problems.
What makes lambda calculus an attractive source to draw from?
In the next lesson, we'll go into details of
what makes functional programming unique and attractive.